any hair is just coming up now for the
press conference and Gavin Williamson
Secretary of State for education about
to speak welcome to today's briefing
from Downing Street I'm joined by dr.
Johnny Harris for deputy chief medical
officer first I want to update you on
the latest data on the corona virus
response two million four hundred and
eighty nine thousand five hundred and
sixty three tests for corona virus have
now been carried out in the United
Kingdom including one hundred and thirty
six thousand four hundred and eighty six
tests carried out just yesterday two
hundred and forty thousand one hundred
and sixty one people had tested positive
that's an increase of three thousand
four hundred and fifty-one cases since
yesterday
ten thousand four hundred and eighty
four people are currently in the
hospital with corona virus down from 12%
from eleven thousand eight hundred and
seventy two this time last week and
sadly of those tested positive for
corona virus across all settings thirty
four thousand four hundred and sixty six
have now passed away that's an increase
of four hundred and sixty eight
fatalities since yesterday this new
figure includes deaths in all settings
not just in hospitals before we begin
questions from the public and from the
media I wanted to remind people of
details of the next phase of our fight
against corona virus could we have the
first slide please in order to monitor
our progress we're establishing a new
covert alert level system with five
levels each relating to their level of
threat posed by the virus the alert
level will be based primarily on the
r-value and the number of corona virus
cases and in turn that alert level
determine the level of social distancing
measures in place the lower the level
for fewer four measures the higher the
level the stricter the measures
throughout the period of lockdown which
started on the 23rd of March we have
been at a level four thanks to the hard
work in the sacrifices of a British
people in this lockdown we've helped to
bring the our number down and we're now
in a position to begin moving to level
three in very careful steps slide two
please we've set out for first three
steps we will take to carefully modify
the measures gradually ease Verloc down
and begin to allow people to return to
their way of life but crucially avoiding
a second peak that could overwhelm the
National Health Service after each step
we will closely monitor the impact of
that step on the are and the number of
infections and we will only take the
next step when we are satisfied that it
is safe to do so
step one from this week means that those
who cannot work from home should now
speak to their employer about going back
to work
you can now spend time outdoors and
exercise as often as you like you can
meet one person outside of your
household in an outdoor public place
provided you stay two metres apart slide
three please having taken the first step
in carefully adjusting some of the
measures and our advice to people
we have also updated what we're asking
people to do which is to stay alert
control the virus and save lives because
if everyone stays alert and follows
these rules we can control coronavirus
by ensuring the our number does not go
above one and reducing the number of in
affections this is how we can continue
to save lives and livelihoods as we
begin as a nation to recover from
coronavirus I now want to turn to our
plans for the wider opening of schools
at this time of year GCSE and a-level
students would have been making final
preparations for their exams while other
students would have been enjoying their
summer term if you're one of them as
I've said before I can only say how
sorry I am that this has all happened to
you this year the sacrifices that you
have had to make through no choice of
your own but the impact that this
coronavirus has had on your life has
made things so incredibly tough for all
of you it is now almost eight weeks
since we asked schools nurseries and
colleges to close for all but a small
number of children once again I'd like
to say an enormous thank you to all the
school college and childcare staff
who've done so much going above and
beyond the call of duty to care for
small groups of children of critical
workers vulnerable children as well as
making sure that there's resources
available at home for children to be
able to learn and interacting with them
contacting them making sure that
children know that you are there for
them you have simply been outstanding
and we're so grateful for what you've
done we have been quite clear all along
that we would only start inviting more
children back into schools when our five
key tests have been met that position
has not changed nor will it and it is
what is guiding all
actions but we do want to see children
back in school because we know how much
children grow and benefit from being in
school we can now start for planning for
a very limited return to school for some
pupils potentially as early as next
month let me explain how this will work
because I know that some people
including parents and teachers are very
anxious about this if a rates of
infection are decreasing it will give us
a green light to get children back into
child care and more of them back into
school from the 1st of June as part of a
cautious phased return those in
reception year 1 and year 6 will be
allowed back into school in smaller
class sizes we're also planning to get
some secondary school students back
those years in 10 and 12 to make sure
that they're a have the opportunity to
come back to school on a limited basis
and have some face-to-face time with
their teachers we are prioritizing these
children because they stand to lose more
by staying away from school the first
years of school are pivotal for children
to develop social and behavioral skills
and to learn the basics that they're
going to have a huge bearing on how well
they do in their life students in years
10 and 12 were there facing the fact
that they're going to be sitting exams
next year and it's vital that we do all
that we can to help them succeed and
help them do well it's also particularly
important for vulnerable and
disadvantaged young people there are
some who would like to delay the wider
opening of schools but there is a
consequence to this
for longer the schools are closed but
more the children miss out teachers know
this teachers know that there are
children out there that have not spoken
or played with another child their own
age for the last two months they know
there are children from difficult or
very unhappy homes for whom school is
their happiest moment in their week and
it's also the safest place for them to
be and it's thanks to their teachers and
the support that their teachers give to
them that they are safe and that they
are happy the poorest children the most
disadvantaged children for children who
do not always have the support they need
at home will be the ones who will fall
furthest behind
if we keep school gates closed they are
the ones who will miss out on the
opportunities and chances in life that
we want all children to benefit from
from what teachers do for them and what
schools can deliver for them so we're
asking some children to come back from
the 1st of June and we're asking schools
to adopt a number of strips protective
measures this includes
reducing class sizes making sure pupils
stay within these small groups creating
a protective and small bubble around
them schools will also be rigorous about
hygiene cleaning and hand-washing school
staff can already be tested for the
Viper virus but from the 1st of June
we'll extend that to cover children and
their families if any of them develop
symptoms track and trace methods will
then be used for event the virus from
spreading together these measures will
create an inherently safer system where
the risk of transmission is
substantially reduced for children their
teachers and also their families my
department has been issuing full and
detailed guidance on how to implement
these measures
to prepare for wider opening we have
worked closely with a sector listening
to those who work in the classroom we
will also continue to do so to ensure
schools have the support that they need
it goes without saying that we will be
carefully monitoring the impact this
first phase has and we'll use this to
guide us when we consider our next steps
this phase return is in line what other
European countries are doing to get
their own schools colleges and nurseries
back I know a lot of you will be worried
about sending your children to school
every one of us wants the very best for
our children and I know how stressful
this time has been for all families
right across the country I want to
reassure you that this approach is based
on the best scientific advice with
children at the very heart of everything
that we do education is one of the most
important and precious gifts that we can
give any child so when we are advised
that we can start to bring some children
back to school we should do so so that
they don't miss out on the enormous
opportunities to learn to be with their
friends to benefit from everything that
their teachers and their schools can
offer them we owe it to the children in
order to be able to do that I'd like to
now hand over to Jenny and then we will
take some questions this side please
thank you sue this slide shows change in
behaviors in social distancing since
lockdown on the 23rd it's taken looking
back indexed against travel earlier in
the year or in the case of rail from
last year so that we get a good
comparison of what we're doing now and
what we've been doing prior to lockdown
and consistently and thanks to the pub
support you can see that in almost well
on all forms of transport we are now
continuing to maintain much lower levels
of travel clearly heavy goods vehicles
we can see have been much more active
and we would expect that in terms of
supplying all our essential items and
some movement now as people start going
back to work on light goods vehicles and
cars as well but consistently staying
down and that will continue to support
social distancing as we go forward and
it is important that we continue to
maintain that next slide please
this slide represents our current
situation on testing and new cases so on
the right hand side the pink bar you can
see now a sustained increase in testing
capacity or test achieved and the number
on the Left 136 thousand four hundred
and eighty six in the last twenty four
hours up to today's date is the highest
that has been achieved since we started
and that will continue to expand so now
very close to two and a half million
tests completed in total and that's
right across all the different sorts of
testing whether we're sending them out
doing them in the labs or from satellite
locations the confirmed cases therefore
despite that increase in testing
capacity and you might expect that we
would actually find more cases as we
were doing that quite reassuringly
although we've had three thousand four
hundred and fifty-one new cases
confirmed overall that chart is still
tending to trend downwards it is a
caveat because as our testing increases
we will find more cases but still
trending downwards and so confirmed
total is now two hundred and forty
thousand one hundred and sixty one cases
in the UK next slide please
again this is the data from hospitals
estimated admissions with Co vid on the
14th of May 736 there's a small delay in
getting that data through and you can
see on the slide on the right that we
are
maintaining a slow and steady downward
trend if we look back a week ago those
case numbers were 971 and you can see on
the graph that we were up in the
thousands at the peak of the pandemic in
the UK and that translates through to
right across the UK on the bottom side
on the right the percentage of critical
care beds which have been occupied by
Kovac 19 patients again at the peak of
the pandemic over 50% of beds were being
taken up critical care beds and on the
15th of May that was down to 20% again
down 4 or 5% from the week before
on average next I believe this slide
shows the number of people in hospital
with kovat by region and by UK country
we can see very clearly the the high
peak in London with a fairly sharp rise
and fall and in other areas slightly
different shapes to the peak of the
epidemic as it came through some are
slightly flatter all of them are
trending down slowly so it's really
important that we still maintain despite
a slight lifting in these measures that
we continue to practice good respiratory
and hand hygiene and continue to
socially distant and abide by all the
advice and and rules that have been
provided but nevertheless across every
region and country we've got movement in
the right direction and this week 10,000
484 people in hospital today
or in the last 24 hours that's down
about a hundred and 1500 from this time
last week next time please and then
finally sadly 468 cases of deaths
confirmed where individuals have had a
positive test with kovat and we've seen
over time that the daily death rate is
very slightly but overall the seven-day
rolling average that's a line coming
down indicates that the rate of deaths
gradually as we come
out of the pandemic in the UK is
continuing to fall down first of all we
go to Lindsay from Gateshead as a
resident of Gateshead which currently
has the highest rate of Corbett
infections in the UK I think the
imminent reopening of schools in my area
is a very risky decision with
potentially dangerous consequences why
are the government in a regional
approach to the reopening of schools due
to the significant differences in
infection rates across each area of the
UK surely this would be a safer and more
controlled way of easing lockdown well I
think you have so much Lindsay for that
question the issue of schools reopening
it's vitally important for all children
to have the opportunity to come back to
school and have the opportunity to be
with their teachers but we're doing this
in a very very cautious and phased way
and if there are concerns about the our
rate we will make sure that we sort of
look at that in great detail and we will
look at the rate of infection but we
have five key tests and it's only if we
pass those five key tests that will look
at that phased return of schools with
more children being able to attend Jenny
yes and so just to add to that the joint
biosecurity Centre which is being
established is specifically to look at
the granularity of the data and things
like the r-value and the infection rates
and where those infections are happening
and I think it's probably important to
note that for most communities the our
rate is likely to be significantly lower
than the national are and that's because
we recognized that there are numbers of
infections generated in health and care
settings all of which are being strongly
addressed but nevertheless it perhaps
gives us slightly different picture to
the population of what the risks are in
communities and the r-value has been
modeled for about seven different
to school scenarios by sage and the one
that's adopted is a very it gives a very
small increase and the design of that is
to ensure that we can continue to keep
those our values down to safe levels but
they will be reviewed with increasing
granularity of data as our surveys and
testing comes back thank you next we
will go from to Lee from Maidstone and
Lee has asked given the be NHS has
confirmed that over 25 percent of people
who have died in hospital of coronavirus
were diabetic or the government review
who should be on the shielded list
should people with diabetes now be added
to that list and Jenny yes very happy to
answer that one so I think the data
which the NHS put out is obviously very
important data but what it was doing was
looking at individual specific diseases
without perhaps taking into
consideration some of the other risk
variables the other factors that each
individual patient with diabetes had so
for example we know that individuals who
are obese will have a high high rates of
type 2 diabetes we also know that they
may have some other underlying health
conditions so they're more likely to
have cardiovascular disease and it's
quemic heart disease for example so it's
really important that we put all these
variables together to understand risk
and in fact the one that is coming
through very strongly in our review of
data as it continues to grow is around
age and of course we also know that
diabetes the proportion of the
population with diabetes continues to
rise with age so in answer to the last
question about the shielded list we are
actually reviewing all of these
different risk factors together to try
and give a much more proportional
representation of who might be at risk
and of course actually diabetes type 2
diabetes not type 1 is one which many of
us in the population can perhaps do
something about to reduce our risk so
gain a great plug from a public health
doctor perhaps to during this pandemic
think think about the diet and exercise
and what
you can do to help there Thank You Jenny
and next if we can go to Bronwyn from
the BBC the BMA the British Medical
Association says cases are not dropping
fast enough to reopen schools if that's
still their view in June will you be
comfortable ignoring the UK's doctors
and where local councils are saying to
schools they don't have to open should
school governors be listening to them or
to you well thank you ever so much
Bronwyn for that question now turns a
janitor maybe add some extra comments on
this we recognize how important schools
are in terms of the importance role that
they play in every child's life and it
is understandable then when you're given
the advice that there is an opportunity
to start opening schools in a very
controlled careful and phased way
because of a benefits for the enormous
benefits that that delivers every single
child not just in terms of their
education but in terms of their
emotional welfare their physical welfare
as well we should be looking at doing
that but we will look at all advice that
we get and that is why we put different
thoughts as to how we bring schools back
to Sage to ask quite quite clearly as to
whether how that fits in terms of their
modelling and actually how that fits
into the whole roadmap that the whole
government is doing in terms of not just
schools but right across industry and
everything else because it's not just
something that can be seen in isolation
it has to be seen in the totality of
what's doing but I would hope there's
any school wherever it is in the country
actually puts at the heart of what it
does is making sure we're delivering the
very best for every single child in this
country and making sure we do everything
we can do to give them the opportunity
to get back into school get learning
having the benefit but being with their
teachers once more
but we will be working not just with
local authorities not just with unions
but all representative bodies to work
with them to make sure we help them to
bring all schools back Jenny so I was
thinking as a doctor advising government
I'm going to be very disappointed if
they're not listening to doctors but
that might be for for me to cope with I
think the important thing is the
government advisory group Sage has
inputs from a huge amount of not just
medical professions but statisticians
modelers as well but very very strong
input from doctors all around both in
clinical practice and in academic units
and a very considerable thought modeling
and consideration of behavioral aspects
as well has gone into the advice around
schools with a number of different I've
said earlier very very different
scenarios modeled for example on age and
timing all sorts of things so I think
obviously it's important that if other
groups whether it be the BMA or other
medical groups have additional
information that they feel should be you
know may have been missed or needs to
come into that consideration I'm sure
sage and government would be very keen
to see that I think the important
message on the evidence that we have for
children is there are two p two groups
at potential risk here I think one are
the children
we know that we think children probably
have same level of infections we're just
coming through that data now with the
ONS survey but they definitely don't get
as ill we very rarely see children in
hospital in proportion
you know proportion to the older
population for example and for younger
children as well evidence is still
growing but there may be some evidence
there that they are less likely to pass
it on for teachers again it's difficult
because obviously we've had lockdown but
some high level sort of signals if you
look at the ONS death rates for example
the teacher teaching profession on that
they're quite crude data so we have to
look at it carefully but very low
actually in comparison to and
of other different professions or or
work areas so I think we've got a number
of signals that say this is a safe place
to go and then coming to the numbers of
cases in our population
I think the perspective is we do need to
keep them down we need to actually track
them now as they're dropping and really
get on top of it it's a great
opportunity but the latest ons data
suggests that maybe last week there was
about 1 in 400 people with infection
another couple of weeks that's having at
our current reduction rate so that's
going to be maybe one in 100 sorry yes
the way round rather it will be half
that rate and so I think parents and
teachers should not be thinking that
every school is likely to be swarming
with cases we're moving in quite a
different direction now I mean I'm not
sure there's a follow-up question
governors and on that point about the
school governors they are going to be
thinking about their legal
responsibilities in terms of making each
school say how are they meant to
reconcile that conflicting advice
they're getting from you and from local
councils well our guidance has been
quite clear we have made it absolutely
clear that there's a set of five tests
that we are going to be judging as to
the opening of additional year groups
for schools and if we pass those five
tests and we'll look at opening schools
up more from early June from the 1st of
June but what we would ask them to do is
look at the guidance very very carefully
and recognize the facts that we are
there to provide the very best for every
single child who goes to that school and
the best way of doing that the best way
of protecting children the best way of
giving them the best opportunities in
life is actually to have them coming
back into school and this is a very
small tentative step in what I believe
is the right direction if we pass those
five tests but it's been done incredibly
course
with welfare and be interested children
and those who work in school absolutely
at the heart of it and next if we can go
to Shehab please from ITV we heard
yesterday that the our estimate had been
revised upwards can you provide a
guarantee that these measures for
reopening some of these school years
will not result in a significant
increase in that our value going up and
if you can't and there is a significant
spike in infections what is the R value
at which point you consider reversing
the new strategy so think you have so
much for that question
and I will hand over to G any on V R
rate specifically but we put forward a
series of suggestions about how we best
approach this primarily focused in terms
of the impact in terms of children and
their education but what we did is we
asked sage and government scientists to
look at the different models that they
were that we were proposing to see what
would have a least impact in terms of
that our rate so so the our value is you
see the way it was published yes who's
not 0.72 one that's quite a broad range
under 1 if we're looking at something
that is so important but and that rate
is derived from a number of different
modelers and each modeler will put in
each modelling group will put in a
slightly different data it will process
it in a different way and they're all
compared to C to come out with the broad
consensus so I think all of the models
were assured that it was coming out
under one you are right it have gone up
slightly using that consensus model from
the previous estimates but nevertheless
I think they've also been very clear and
and I have said frequently we need to be
really careful what it is we've got a
number of different our rates it's a bit
like saying everybody in one area
has the same sort of house because the
average one looks like this we clearly
know that we all have very different
circumstances and the circumstances for
our relates to where infections are most
prominent and we need to understand the
risks of why infections are rising in
certain areas and what we have in there
are predominantly three different our
values we have community which will be
most people in their homes and that's
where the ONS data is coming from that's
household data we have care homes which
have had high rates they're starting to
come down and we've had hospitals as
well so it's it's quite difficult it's
really important we keep an eye on it
it's really important that we understand
how it is in different areas but it's
also really important we understand what
the drivers are in the areas because it
may well not be stopping children going
back to school it may be putting
completely different measures into say a
local hotspot whether that be a hospital
or a care home and as we get more
granular information from the surveys
going forward we'll be able to do that
increasingly so I think going back
without putting ideas into politicians
maths I think it's really important we
do understand that on a regional basis
and look below that top level because we
don't want to detract from the majority
of children's education which will set
them up for life in employment and
actually predict their longer-term
health outcomes by clamping down perhaps
on on one just for a single area yeah
would you like a follow-up question at
all
yeah please correct me if I'm mistaken
but you didn't rule out that there might
be a significant rise in infections if
you open up schools if you're getting an
R value an average R value across
several different bits of research based
on the community is there a figure based
on the community that if it surpasses
that you will consider reversing this
strategy so the decision for reversal
clearly will go back to ministers and we
did the scientific advice I think what I
was trying to say is on the modeling the
the model that's been adopted the
suggestion of younger children going
back to school
not just because of the school
environment actually it's because of the
behaviors that go with it
if you pull back a whole load of older
children they tend to get on buses
travel longer distances have different
social interactions and some of those
social interactions are actually far
more significant in moving the r-value
than actually just going back to school
so I think the important thing is we
need to understand in each area what it
is so if you had a region where the
r-value had not come down quite so much
if that was because there was a high
population level of disease then you may
well wish to consider what social
interventions including education but
also what we were doing in parks and all
sorts of things what you wanted to do
and that's why the joint biosecurity
Center has been set up to be able to see
that but what I think you wouldn't want
to do is this for a very small change in
our which is predicted from opening up
schools in the way that they have a very
very small amount on top of this you
wouldn't want to stop children's
education when actually the right
interaction would be to manage an
outbreak in a care home for example so I
think it will depend very much on the
circumstances as we move forward and
just really to emphasize we've taken the
most cautious and precautionary approach
to this and and the reason that we've
set up the covert alert level system is
really to guide not just government but
also to the public of the challenges and
the changes as we fight this virus if I
can next go to Tom rein from Sky Tom
thank you education secretary two
questions if I may increased hygiene
measures and reduced class sizes is it
the case the children in reception and
year one will not be expected that's a
socially distance when they interact
with classmates in the classroom and
secondly there will of course be
millions of children who will not be
going back to school for many months so
what are you going to do to ensure
better national coordination and support
to make remote learning more effective
and to ease the burden which is
currently falling large
on the shoulders of individual teachers
and parents well thank you very much Tom
on both those questions so what we're
doing is we're proposing a whole range
of different things that we want to see
happening within schools we want to make
sure firstly we will not be bringing
schools back and less weave Society for
five t-tests we've established a
hierarchy of controls making sure that
people are staying at home if they are
symptomatic of coronavirus making sure
that there's a proper hand-washing and
hygiene mechanisms within schools making
sure there's an incredibly thorough
cleaning mechanism within all schools
but a key element of it as you rightly
put on is about minimizing contact and
minimizing mixing and that's why we've
gone in this initial stage of much
reduced classroom sizes down to a
maximum of 50 and we've looked all the
way across Europe as to see how this
best works and we've seen some very good
examples in nations such as Denmark
where it seems to have worked very very
well and what we're doing by doing all
of these things making sure that there's
proper hygiene method of a proper
hygiene in place in terms of children
and all those who are working within the
classroom we're creating a protective
bubble around them reducing the amount
of mixing making sure that those small
groups stay together almost like a
family within a classroom and by
reducing the amount of contact that they
have with other children and with other
teachers as well we dramatically reduce
the risk of than being in a situation of
getting coronavirus and making sure we
continue to keep transmission low Jenny
I'm not sure if you could imagine then
I'll come back on the home learning I
mean exactly as you said I think
underlying all of these interventions
are but some broad public health
principles which we're all trying to do
we're trying to reduce the number of so
interactions we have but we need to do
that in a balanced way so on the the
sort of adult side we've we've said we
can go outside more we know that's a
reasonably safe environment for children
in these environments you look and say
what are these hierarchies of control
that you can do so good respiratory and
hand hygiene absolutely important and in
fact teachers are brilliant at getting
kids to do things usually my experience
far more successful than parents and
they can get them to wash their hands
systematically so this is actually a
good educational learning place for all
sorts of hygiene interventions but I
think importantly as the secretary of
state has said this idea of having a
small group where you'll you have
interaction you'll increase the level of
interaction a small amount but it's
contained and and therefore children are
benefiting from that but it's not
exponential if you like but even so even
within a classroom although we recognize
small children will run around and
interact and we expect them to
you can still distance and I know this
is the plans for example work desks can
be distanced and in fact a child rushing
past another one in a normal sort of
player is probably not much of a risk it
depends but if they were sitting
directly opposite each other in a very
small space close together for a long
amount of time that might be more of a
risk so all of the interventions are
designed to minimise those while still
allowing children to learn and told me
if I can pick up on your second question
about how we're supporting children and
families and again to take the
opportunity to thank so many within the
teaching profession for the amazing work
that they have been doing in terms of
supporting children as they learn at
home there is no substitute for a child
being in school and having the amazing
opportunity to sit in front of their
teacher be inspired by their teacher be
motivated by their teacher and that's
why quite understandably we want to see
when the time is right for children to
be able to return back to the classroom
but we've already seen a number of
interventions that we've already made we
set up the oak
Academy this is something that's only
been going for three weeks and we've
already delivered six million lessons
through V Oak National Academy a truly
transformative experience delivering
brilliant education into the homes of so
many but equally we recognize as
children from really disadvantaged
backgrounds that actually maybe don't
have access to the Internet or computer
resources that's why we're spending over
a hundred million pounds making sure
that we can get laptops out to some of
those you know some of those children
that have really been suffering as a
result of not being in school and not
being able to learn and being supported
by the internet and we're looking at a
whole package of other measures that
we're looking at how we can support
children to them and whether they're at
return to school and we're wanting them
to catch up on some of the things that
they've missed or whether they're not in
that fortunate enough position to have
been able to have returned to school if
I can move on to David from the Sunday
Express David Thank You Secretary of
State some other great hopes if your
government was to live a lot Society
what does the future hold for children
who go to special schools is it
realistic to think that social
distancing can be enforced and what help
will there be for teachers to make up
the lost time ensure that these children
aren't left behind and will you run
special classes for all vulnerable
children in the summer and given that
teachers are so concerned by the risks
of returning in June these are a
possibility that you should consider
starting the next school year in early
August so thank you David
they are currently no plans to start the
new school year in early August but what
we believe in terms of our phased
gradual cautious approach to children
returning to schools this is something
that I very much hope that both teachers
and of course parents and children have
real confidence in you raise an
important issue we got elected on an
agenda of leveling or right across
society and there is no better way of
leveling up you know whether it is
children or adults than through
education education is the greatest
leveler and what we will be doing in the
department has been doing an enormous
amount of work over the last few weeks
about how we really drive that agenda
forward making sure that people do not
miss out as a result of this crisis
looking at how we can make the
interventions to support children
whether they're going to special schools
but also whether they're going to
mainstream schools to make sure they
benefit from some of the best teaching
in the world this is actually done in
this country and we're looking at
different initiatives that we could
maybe look at rolling out during for
summer period but if you'll forgive me
I'll probably not divulge those just of
a moment as we just have a little bit
more work to do on them David I'm not
sure if there's a follow-up question
there are you teachers are so worries
that they refuse to go back to
classrooms is there a genuine risk that
they will face disciplinary action and
if gaps in the work force cannot be met
would you consider adding had teachers
new freedoms to hire graduates to fill
those gaps and there is this one thing
that's been puzzling some parents
because the government has said that
groups with importance exams next year
or two go by first why is it the year
six which will not have exams next year
they're going ahead of your thighs who
looking ahead to sitting their SATs well
if they thank you David well one of the
key reasons that year six was chosen is
there a key transition year as many of
those children will be moving on to
their next phase of education by going
to secondary school and we felt it was
important for them to have an
opportunity to be able to go back to
school
finalize some of them their study and be
ready to move on to their next stage of
their academic career we are working
with all the teaching unions and right
across the sector to give people for
competence about the importance of
returning to school and every teacher
understands that there is no substitute
for a child being in a classroom being
taught by them they are the ones that
make a difference to a child's life they
are the ones who will inspire and
motivate them to learn and want to learn
to be hungry for more to be able to
achieve a maximum and will continue to
do all we can do to make sure that as
many children as possible only when it
is the right time get the opportunity to
be in a classroom and we'll work right
across the sector to make sure that that
happens and I look forward to working
with all two parents children and of
course teachers to make sure that we're
getting the very best for children right
across the country if we can next go to
Brendan from Mail on Sunday Brendan
you've made the point about the the fact
that the most disadvantaged children
perhaps the ones who are really
suffering from not being at school in
your discussions with the union leaders
who seem to not return are you worried
that they they don't understand that or
that they're prepared to sacrifice those
so Brendon and I think everyone and
we've seen it over the last few months
you've seen teachers going above and
beyond in terms of actually supporting
children making sure that schools are
open up every single week open up opened
up over the Easter holidays on the bank
holidays supporting the children from
some of the most disadvantaged and
vulnerable backgrounds and also
supporting for children of critical
workers and every teacher every teacher
I've ever spoken to understands
absolutely clearly absolutely clearly
that actually a child in school
especially if they're from some of the
most disadvantaged backgrounds from the
poorest backgrounds they achieve so much
more by being in school they absolutely
thrive they get so much more from life
is is one of the best places as part of
their life in order to succeed and grow
and
I think teachers understand that so
incredibly well but one thing I would
say not just to unions but to all
organizations that represent schools and
governors my door is always open
I'm always keen to listen and talk to
them I've been bleep meeting both
representative organizations of school
groups but also unions every single week
not just during since first schools were
closed but actually beforehand as well
and I always want to talk we want to
find practical solutions to make sure
that those children from that most
disadvantaged background don't lose out
as a result of this crisis and I hope
that everyone is unified in that mission
to deliver that yes are you saying then
therefore that from your experience the
teachers are many of them don't agree
with what their union leaders are saying
well and therefore they should you would
like them to appeal to teachers to to to
go back to school and open schools and
in a sense ignore what they what they're
you you need is a saying well Brett
Brendon teachers have been absolute
heroes all the way through this crisis
they have been leading by example
they've been going into school they're
being running lessons you know not in
the classroom but reaching out into
people's homes they understand the
importance of schooling they understand
the impact that it can make on
children's lives they understand and
know the importance of what they're
doing and how they can change for lives
and the life chances of all children
especially those who are most
disadvantaged but I would say to all
teachers thank you for what you're doing
please keep doing what you're doing and
I want to work with you to make sure
that we continue to deliver the very
best for all of our children if we can
go on to Nigel from Sunday Mirror Nigel
Secretary of State and primary school
teachers are predominantly women how
will they be expected to go back to work
when there won't be any childcare
available and to dr. Harris do by May
children will be allowed to take their
own lunchboxes to school but not their
own pencil cases what exactly is the
difference
so you're Nigel you're absolutely right
to highlight the important need that
many teachers especially in primary
school well across all the school
sectors have in terms of needing an
education for their children and you'll
have probably noticed their guidance
that we issued on the 24th of March of
this year which actually included
teachers and all those who work in
schools as critical workers so those
teachers those teaching assistants those
who work within the school environment
all have access to to education
provision for their children Jenny if I
can hand over that that's quite an
interesting question I haven't heard
that one before so the the basic public
health principle is you want to keep
everything as clean as possible at
points if you like so the things we
normally think of door handles those
sorts of things
wipe down and clean frequently I think
the thing in a children's environment is
there are certain things that you can
control pretty well which might include
pencil cases and things that you use
routinely during education and by doing
that the schools can provide them and
then sure that they are maintained clean
the issue about lunchboxes is they're
quite personal to the child eating the
lunch and I can almost guarantee that
one child won't want to eat the lunch of
the one sitting hopefully two metres
distance from them and actually when
you're eating you're also putting your
hands up to your mouths and to your face
so there is a differential there around
risk both on what individuals need and
what the school can supply and on
managing the hygiene around it but
I mean for both of those it's really
important that both of them are kept as
clean as possible and that good hand
hygiene particularly is done so
encouraging children to wash their hands
before and after their eating as well
thank you so much and can I thank all of
you for taking the time to listening and
please do stay safe thank you okay and
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC news live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News